---
layout: post
title:  "Integral of \\(\\frac{1}{\\ln^2 $x + 1}\\) (Ei + complex)"
date:   2023-03-07 20:28:00 -0600
categories: integrals
---

This integral came up while I was trying to integrate $$ \operatorname{atan}(\frac{1}{\ln $x}) $$. I'm still pretty new at solving integrals, but I'm thrilled to have learned a lesson here.

By the way, we're doing to be using this useful non-elementary function:

$$ \operatorname{Ei}($x) = \int \frac{e^{$x}}{$x}\,\mathrm d$x $$

First, we do $$ $u $$-substitution:

Let $$ $u = \ln $x $$, therefore $$ \mathrm d$u = \frac{\mathrm d$x}{$x} $$, and $$ e^{$u}\,\mathrm d$u = \mathrm d$x $$.

$$ \int \frac{1}{\ln^2 $x + 1}\,\mathrm d$x = \int \frac{e^{$u}}{$u^2 + 1}\,\mathrm d$u $$

I quickly got stuck here, until a friend (thanks Evan!) told me that this integral is not real. It's *complex*.

Sorry, you probably heard that joke a million times.

Going against my Algebra II teacher's advice that a sum of squares is not factorable, I went ahead and did it anyway only a year later.

$$ \int \frac{e^{$u}}{($u + i)($u - i)}\,\mathrm d$u $$


By the way, you can't have exponents in the numerator during PFD. Not exactly sure why. It's no problem though, since we can separate the numerator from the denominator [as indicated by this helpful SE post.](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1047549/partial-fraction-decomposition-with-exponent-in-numerator)

$$ \int e^{$u}\frac{1}{($u + i)($u - i)}\,\mathrm d$u $$

My deepest, darkest secret is that I despise partial fraction decomposition, but this one is easy.

$$ \frac{1}{($u + i)($u - i)} = \frac{A}{$u + i} + \frac{B}{$u - i} $$

$$ 1 = A($u - i) + B($u + i) $$

$$ A = -\frac{1}{2i}, B = \frac{1}{2i} $$

So

$$ \int \frac{e^{$u}}{$u^2 + 1}\,\mathrm d$u = \frac{1}{2i} \left[\int \frac{e^{$u}}{$u - i}\,\mathrm d$u - \int \frac{e^{$u}}{$u + i}\,\mathrm d$u\right] $$

Both of these integrals are non-elementary, but they're also pretty easy, thinking back to our $$ \operatorname{Ei}($x) $$ mentioned at the beginning of the post. I'll do one of them, but the other is evaluated the same way.

If we pick

$$ \int \frac{e^{$u}}{$u - i}\,\mathrm d$u $$

Let $$ $w = $u - i $$, then $$ $u = $w + i $$. It follows that

$$ \int \frac{e^{$w + i}}{$w}\,\mathrm d$w = \int \frac{e^{$w}e^i}{$w}\,\mathrm d$w = e^i\int \frac{e^{$w}}{$w}\,\mathrm d$w = e^i\operatorname{Ei}($w) = e^i\operatorname{Ei}($u - i) $$

We plug back in,

$$ \frac{1}{2i} \left[\int \frac{e^{$u}}{$u - i}\,\mathrm d$u - \int \frac{e^{$u}}{$u + i}\,\mathrm d$u\right] = \frac{e^i\operatorname{Ei}($u - i)}{2i} - \frac{e^{-i}\operatorname{Ei}($u + i)}{2i} $$

Substitute $$ $u = \ln $x $$ and add $$ +\:c $$ 

$$ \int \frac{1}{\ln^2 $x + 1}\,\mathrm d$x = \frac{e^i\operatorname{Ei}(\ln $x - i)}{2i} - \frac{e^{-i}\operatorname{Ei}(\ln $x + i)}{2i} + c $$

P.S. You might see some answers use the identity $$ \frac{1}{i} = -i $$.
