---
layout: post
title:  "AP Macroeconomics (Topic 1)"
date:   2023-08-26 19:40:00 -0600
categories: economics
---

$$ \newcommand{\argmax}{\operatorname*{argmax}} $$

# Introduction

One thing I don't like about my economics textbook and lectures at school (in the U.S. education system) was that they are *riddled* with subliminal value judgements
which took away from the rigour I expected of the class. Perhaps as a means of coping, I will now attempt to condense everything I learned from Topic 1: Basic Economic Concepts into a more analytical perspective of what I learned so far.

# Production Possibilities Curve

Let's say that a generic actor $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ has a certain amount of available labor $$ l_{\mathcal{$P}} $$ measured in $$ $L $$, a unit of labor, to produce two commodities $$ $A $$ and $$ $B $$ operating in an arbitrary currency $$ $P $$. Quantify all of these using the positive reals $$ \mathbb{R}^{+} $$. We suppose a family of monotonically increasing functions acting on a commodity $$ $X $$ as $$ \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$X}: $L \rightarrow $X $$. They denote the amount of commodity created as a function of labor.

Now define the **production possibilities curve** of $$ $A $$ and $$ $B $$ as the system of equations 

$$ 
\left\{
\begin{array}{@{}l@{}}
    $x =: \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$A}(\operatorname{Lbr}_{$x})\\
    $y =: \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$B}(\operatorname{Lbr}_{$y})\\
    \operatorname{Lbr}_{$x} + \operatorname{Lbr}_{$y} = l_{\mathcal{$P}}
\end{array}\right. $$

In English, this equation specifies the collection of points such that the amount of labor to make $$ $A $$ on the X axis summed with the amount of labor to make $$ $B $$ on the Y axis must equal $$ \mathcal{$P} $$'s available labor.

If production is within the curve, then not all labor resources are being used, which marks an **inefficient** configuration. Outside of the curve marks **unattainable** configurations.

# Absolute Advantage

We will alias the maximum possible amount of $$ $X $$ that $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ can produce as

$$ \mathrm{Pmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$X} := \max_{$\lambda \in (0, l_{\mathcal{$P}})} \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$X}($\lambda) $$

We define **absolute advantage** of an actor $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ over another actor $$ \mathcal{$Q} $$ for a commodity $$ $X $$ as satisfying the inequality 

$$ \mathrm{Pmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$X} > \mathrm{Pmax}_{\mathcal{$Q},$X} $$

This means that it is possible for $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ to produce *more* of $$ $X $$ using the labor that they have.

# Opportunity Cost

Let $$ $\Lambda := \left\{$\lambda \in (0, l_{\mathcal{$P}}) \mid \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$A}($\lambda) = \mathrm{Pmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$A}\right\} $$. We will define $$ \mathcal{$P} $$'s optimal amount of labor to prioritize a *target* commodity $$ $A $$ over another commodity $$ $B $$ as

$$ \mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$A,$B} := \argmax_{$\lambda \in $\Lambda} \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$B}($\lambda) $$

It is likely that $$ \mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$A} + \mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$B} > l_{\mathcal{$P}} $$, or in other words, $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ can't produce the maximum amount of both commodities. It has to sacrifice some for the other. The sacrificed opportunity (i.e. what $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ *could* have made) is the **opportunity cost** of committing to a production possibility.

# Comparative Advantage

**Comparative advantage** is the ability to produce a commodity at a lower opportunity cost. Or, we will take a more intutive approach and define comparative advantage of an actor $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ over another actor $$ \mathcal{$Q} $$ for a commodity $$ $A $$ over another commodity $$ $B $$ as follows:

Notice that we can "equate by opportunity":

$$ \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$A}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$A,$B})\,\operatorname{amt. of $A} \stackrel{$O}{=} \mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$B}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$B,$A})\,\operatorname{amt. of $B} $$

This means that $$ \mathcal{$P} $$ can either produce the left hand side or the right hand side.

Therefore,

$$ 1\,\operatorname{amt. of $A} \stackrel{$O}{=} \frac{\mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$B}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$B,$A})}{\mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$A}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$A,$B})}\,\operatorname{amt. of $B} $$

Notice that the right hand side is a quantification of the opportunity cost, measured in $$ \operatorname{amt. of $B} $$ of producing $$ 1\,\operatorname{amt. of $A} $$ when committing to $$ \mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$A,$B} $$ instead of $$ \mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$B,$A} $$. Now, we can define comparative advantage as having the lower opportunity cost, or the inequality

$$ 
\frac{\mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$B}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$B,$A})}{\mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$P},$A}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$P},$A,$B})} <
\frac{\mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$Q},$B}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$Q},$B,$A})}{\mathrm{Prod}_{\mathcal{$Q},$A}(\mathrm{Lmax}_{\mathcal{$Q},$A,$B})}
$$

### Specialization

[TODO]