---
layout: post
title:  "Integral of \\($x^{\\ln $x}\\) (erfi)"
date:   2023-03-05 23:35:00 -0600
categories: integrals
---

Junior year of highschool, even though my appeal to be enrolled into the Calculus BC class was unsuccessful, I decided to enter the classroom during my off period regardless and "take" both Precalculus and Calculus BC simultaneously. My love for solving integrals by hand started when they first taught $$$u$$-substitution that day.

Anyways, today (still junior year), I found this problem by accident:

Solve 

$$ \int $x^{\ln $x}\,\mathrm d$x $$ 

in terms of 

$$ \operatorname{erfi}($x) = \frac{2}{\sqrt{\pi}} \int e^{$x^2}\,\mathrm d$x $$

For your information, it's a non-elementary integral, so we need to algebraically manipulate the integrand or perform $$$u$$-substitution to get it into the form of $$ e^{$x^2} $$.

The first step is not very obvious, but it's really helpful to get to our end goal.

$$ \int $x^{\ln $x}\,\mathrm d$x = \int e^{\ln($x^{\ln $x})}\,\mathrm d$x = \int e^{\ln^2 $x}\,\mathrm d$x $$ 

Now this gets us close to our desired $$ e^{$x^2} $$, but unfortunately a simple $$$u$$-substitution won't get us there. Nevertheless, we're going to do it anyway.

Let $$ $u = \ln $x $$. Therefore, $$ \mathrm d$u = \frac{1}{$x}\,\mathrm d$x $$ or $$ $x\,\mathrm d$u = \mathrm d$x $$. Since we can't have $$ $x $$ in the final substitution, we use the fact that $$ $x = e^{$u} $$ and thus $$ e^{$u}\,\mathrm d$u = \mathrm d$x $$.

Substituting $$ \ln $x = $u $$ and $$ \mathrm d$x = e^{$u} \mathrm d$u $$,

$$ \int e^{\ln^2 $x}\,\mathrm d$x = \int e^{$u^2} e^{$u}\,\mathrm d$u = \int e^{$u^2 + $u}\,\mathrm d$u $$ 

So close. I was stuck on this admittedly for an hour.

Though, I thought back to a simple equation that my math teachers appeared to have a hard time proving from the right side:

$$ \sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2} = 2\sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} $$

The analogy is that the state that our integrand is much like the right side of this equation: unfactored.

$$ 2\sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} = \sqrt{8 - 4\sqrt{3}} = \sqrt{(\sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2})^2} = \sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2} $$

Let's do that with our integrand. I'll invent a variable $$ $\phi $$ to make sure we don't make any manipulations that change the value of the expression.

$$ $u^2 + $u = $\phi $$

Complete the square:

$$ ($u + \frac{1}{2})^2 = $\phi + \frac{1}{4} $$

$$ ($u + \frac{1}{2})^2 - \frac{1}{4} = $\phi $$

Therefore,

$$ \int e^{$u^2 + $u}\,\mathrm d$u = \int e^{($u + \frac{1}{2})^2 - \frac{1}{4}}\,\mathrm d$u $$

You may be thinking that we've replaced our problem with another problem, but remember, there is no variable in $$ \frac{1}{4} $$, so we can move it outside of the integral.

$$ \int e^{($u + \frac{1}{2})^2 - \frac{1}{4}}\,\mathrm d$u = \int \frac{e^{($u + \frac{1}{2})^2}}{e^{\frac{1}{4}}}\,\mathrm d$u = \frac{1}{\sqrt[4]{e}} \int e^{($u + \frac{1}{2})^2}\,\mathrm d$u  $$

We're done! We can let $$ $w = $u + \frac{1}{2} $$, and the factored form will reduce to a single variable, adhering to our $$ e^{$x^2} $$, but that isn't strictly necessary.

We just need to rearrange 

$$ \operatorname{erfi}($x) = \frac{2}{\sqrt{\pi}} \int e^{$x^2}\,\mathrm d$x $$

into

$$ \frac{\sqrt{\pi}}{2} \operatorname{erfi}($x) = \int e^{$x^2}\,\mathrm d$x $$

and we have

$$ \frac{1}{\sqrt[4]{e}} \int e^{($u + \frac{1}{2})^2}\,\mathrm d$u = \frac{\sqrt{\pi}}{2\sqrt[4]{e}} \operatorname{erfi}($u + \frac{1}{2}) $$

Don't forget to substitute $$ $u = \ln $x $$ and add $$ +\:c $$ .

$$ \int $x^{\ln $x}\,\mathrm d$x = \frac{1}{2} \cdot \frac{\sqrt{\pi}}{\sqrt[4]{e}} \operatorname{erfi}(\ln $x + \frac{1}{2}) + c $$ 
