---
layout: post
title: "Math art: modeling how monopolies are made"
date: 2024-05-12 10:32:00 -0600
categories: analysis
---

This is for a high school project (Hi, Ms. Hayes) where I'll attempt to model how free markets give rise to monopolies through the centralization of capital. Since a market is a continuous dynamical system through time, differential equations are a great fit for doing this. 

A **monopoly** is a single entity that controls all the supply of a certain product or service. This happens through **horizontal integration** (acquiring or merging with competitors) or outright driving them out of business and using e.g. **economies of scale** (being able to produce at lower cost from having larger production volumes) to prevent new competitors from entering the market. In this analysis, we won't be dealing with horizontal integration (but it makes the effect worse), and we'll assume that the government is non-existent or inert due to **regulatory capture** (the process by which regulated industries manipulate their regulators to their advantage).

If we have a market $$ \Pi $$ that's scarce and profitable ($$ 0 < \Pi < \infty $$) and the rate of capital generation $$ C_i $$ for each firm $$ i $$ increases $$ \frac{\mathrm dC_i}{\mathrm d$t} = \psi \cdot \Pi_i - \eta $$ commensurate with relative market preference $$ \Pi_i = \frac{\Pi \cdot C_i}{\sum_{j} C_j} $$ and accounting for cost of operation $$ \eta > 0 $$, then if $$ C_X > C_Y $$ for firms $$ X $$ and $$ Y $$ then firm $$ Y $$ will not survive.

Prove this by assuming that $$ C_X = C_Y + \epsilon $$ at $$ t = t_0 $$

Then, 

$$ \frac{\mathrm d\Pi_i}{\mathrm d$t} = \Pi \frac{\frac{\mathrm dC_i}{\mathrm d$t} \cdot \sum_{j} C_j - C_i \cdot \sum_{j} \frac{\mathrm dC_j}{\mathrm d$t}}{(\sum_{j} C_j)^2} = \Pi \frac{(\psi \cdot \Pi_i - \eta) \cdot \sum_{j} C_j - C_i \cdot \sum_{j} (\psi \cdot \Pi_j - \eta)}{(\sum_{j} C_j)^2} $$

for $$ Y $$, this looks like

$$ \frac{\mathrm d\Pi_Y}{\mathrm d$t} = \Pi \frac{(\psi \cdot \Pi_Y - \eta) \cdot (C_X + C_Y) - C_Y \cdot (\psi \cdot \Pi_X + \psi \cdot \Pi_Y - 2\eta)}{(C_X + C_Y)^2} $$

$$ = \Pi \frac{\psi \cdot \Pi_Y \cdot C_X + (\psi \cdot \Pi_Y \cdot C_Y) - \eta \cdot C_X - (\eta \cdot C_Y) - \psi \cdot \Pi_X \cdot C_Y - (\psi \cdot \Pi_Y \cdot C_Y) + (2\eta \cdot C_Y)}{(C_X + C_Y)^2} $$

$$ = \Pi \frac{\psi \cdot \Pi_Y \cdot C_X - \psi \cdot C_Y \cdot \Pi_X + \eta \cdot C_Y - \eta \cdot C_X}{(C_Y - C_X)^2} $$

since $$ \psi > 0, \eta > 0, \Pi > 0 $$, now we just have to prove

$$ \Pi_X \cdot C_Y + \eta(C_Y - C_X) < \Pi_Y \cdot C_X $$

$$ \frac{\Pi \cdot C_X \cdot C_Y}{C_X + C_Y} + \eta(C_Y - C_X) < \frac{\Pi \cdot C_Y \cdot C_X}{C_X + C_Y} $$

$$ \eta(C_Y - C_X) < 0 $$

at $$ t = t_0 $$, $$ -\eta \epsilon < 0 $$, so $$ Y $$ loses capital while $$ X $$ gains capital, and this continues until $$ Y $$ loses all its capital.

And that's it! There could be a few more things I could have added, e.g. since acquiring capital is useless in the monopoly stage, we could have proved that product quality and innovation decreases, but I think this is pretty neat already. All entities in a market are continuously vying for more capital, and monopolies are a natural outcome of this competition. 

The term "survival of the fittest" can be very aptly applied here. The problem arises when the "fittest" translates into a single entity dominating the entire market to the detriment of consumers who have no choice but to buy from them. Oversights, regulations and competition laws are therefore required on the part of the government to prevent the formation of monopolies and ensure healthy competition within markets for better consumer welfare. 

So, as our analysis shows us, free markets, left unchecked, have a natural tendency towards monopolization, driven by the principle of survival and the centralization of capital. 

If you have any comments, questions, or wish to engage in further discussion, please feel free to contact me at the email address located on my about page.